## 1152 Punjab Cinematograph Rules 1976
 
PUNJAB CINEMATOGRAPH RULES, 1976
[Gazette of Punjab, Extraordinary, 28th January 1977]
No. S. O. (P 8t C)‑VII‑I/70‑II.‑In exercise of the powers conferred by section 8 of the Cinematograph Act, 1918, and in supersession of the West Pakistan Cinematograph Rules, 1962, the Governor of the Punjab is pleased to make the following rules :‑
CHAPTER I‑INTRODUCTORY
**1. Short title and commencement.**
‑(1) These Rules may be called the Punjab Cinematograph Rules, 1976.
   (2) They shall come into force with immediate effect.
**2. Definitions.**
‑In these Rules, unless the contest otherwise re quires‑
   (i) 'Act' means the Cinematograph Act, 1918 ;
   (ii) 'auditorium' means that portion of the building or place which is occupied by the audience or spectators during a cinematograph exhibition ;
   (iv) 'cinema building' means a building in respect of which an annual licence has been or may be granted under rule 5 ;
   (v) 'Electric Inspector' means an Inspector appointed by Government under section 36 of the Electricity Act, 1910 ;
   (vi) 'enclosure' means that portion of a place licensed under section 3 of the Act in which the cinematograph apparatus is installed;
   (vii) 'Executive Engineer' in relation to the licensing of any place or premises for cinematograph exhibition means the officer holding charge of the Division of the Building Department of Communications and Works Department in which such place or premises is situated ;
   (viii) 'exit' includes an emergency exit and any entrance useable by the public as an exit ;
   (ix) 'fire resisting material' means‑
   (a) burnt brick work, cement, concrete and re‑enforced brickwork or cement concrete having a minimum cover of one inch ;
   (b) terra cotta blocks securely bounded, provided that no side or web therefore is less than one and a half inches in thickness ;
   (c) stone, tiles, solid gypsum blocks, marble, iron, steel, copper, asbestos or zinc ; and
   (d) such other material as Government may by notification in the official Gazette declare to be fire resisting material ;
   (x) 'form' means a form appended to these rules ;
   (xi) 'Government' means the Government of the Punjab ;
   (xii) 'licensee' means the person or persons whose name or names have been entered as such in the licence ;
   (xiii) 'licensing authority' means the District Magistrate in whose jurisdiction any place or premises used or proposed to be used for cinematograph exhibition is situated and includes any other officer specially appointed by Erie Government to perform all or any of the functions of the licensing authority under these Rules ;
   (xiv) 'licensed premises' means a place licensed under section 3 of the Act ;
   (xv) 'No‑Objection Certificate' means a 'No‑Objection Certificate' issued by the appropriate authority under rule 3 ;
   (xvi) 'open air cinema' means a building which is permanently equipped for cinematograph exhibitions but whose auditorium is partly or wholly open to the sky ;
   (xvii) 'Superintending Engineer' in relation to the licensing of any place or premises for cinematograph exhibition means the officer holding the charge of that circle of the buildings Department of Communication and Works Department in whose jurisdiction the Division falls and in which such place or premises is situated
   (xviii) 'touring cinematograph' means a cinematograph apparatus which is so construed that ft can be taken from place to place for the purpose of giving cinematograph exhibitions ;
   (xix) 'touring cinematograph of the safety class' means a touring cinematograph in which an incandescent lamp is used for the projector ; and
   (xx) 'urban area' means the area declared by Government to be a municipality under section 8 of the Punjab Local Government Act, 1975 or deemed to be a municipality under the provisions of the said Act and includes, in the case of Lahore, the area within ten miles of municipal limit, and in the case of any other Municipal Committee, the area within five miles of the municipal limits.
   CHAPTER II‑NO‑OBJECTION CERTIFICATE POI BUILDING A NEW CINEMA
3. Application for No‑Objection Certificate and lee.‑(l) Any person who intends to construct a new cinema building shall make application to the Magistrate for the grant of a 'No‑Objection Certificate and every such appli cation shall be accompanied by a non‑refundable fee of rupees one thousand (Rs. 1,0G0), and a plan of the proposed site drawn to scale which shall clearly indicate the surrounding roads and buildings including mosques, recognized educational institutions, hospitals, recognised mazars as in revenue record and graveyards situated within a distance of 100 yards of the proposed site;
   Provided that it shall not be necessary to obtain a 'No‑Objection Certifi cate' in the case of an application for renewal of an annual licence.
   (2) The District Magistrate shall take into consideration any objection and‑---
   (a) in the case of an application pertaining to the 'urban area' of Lahore, Rawalpindi, Multan, Sargodha and Lyallpur make recommendation to the Commissioner of the Division whether 'No‑Objection Certificate' should be granted or not ; and
   (b) in other cases, he may, at his discretion, grant a 'No‑Objection Certificate' or refuse to grant the same; provided that where the District Magistrate refuses to grant a 'No‑Objection Certificate, the applicant may, within thirty days of the communication of such decision to him, appeal against the decision to the Commissioner ;
   Provided further that where the Commissioner rejects the appeal against the decision of the District Magistrates refusing the grant of a 'No‑Objection Certificate'. the applicant, may within 30 days of the communication of such decision to him, appeal against it to Government whose decision shall be final.
   (3) Power of Commissioner to grant or refuse 'No‑Objection Certificate'---. On consideration of the report of the District Magistrate made under clause (a) of sub‑rule (2), the Commissioner may grant a 'No‑objection Certificate' or refuse to grant the same;
   Provided that where the Commissioner refuses to grant a 'No‑Objection Certificate' the applicant may within thirty days of the communication of such decision to him appeal against it to Government whose decision shall be final.
   (4) Validity of 'No‑Objection Certificate'.‑The 'No‑Objection Certificate' shall be in Form 'A' and shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issue and shall not be transferable, and shall not in any way affect the discretion of the licensing authority to grant or refuse a licence under rule 73 (1).
   (5) Extension in time of 'No Objection Certificate.‑The 'No‑Objection Certificate' shall be extended for a period of six months at a time subject to a maximum period of two years. The owner shall deposit an additional fee of Rs. 1,000 with the application for each extension.
   4 Application to be accompanied by plan.‑(1) The holder of a 'No- Objection Certificate' shall submit the necessary application with plans and designs within two months of the issue of 'No‑Objection Certificate' to the licensing authority who shall forward them to the Executive Engineer. The applicant shall be bound to carry out such reasonable additions and alterations in the plans and designs as may be directed by Executive Engineer before they are approved by him. The plans shall be approved by the Executive Engineer within 2 months of their submission.
   (2) After the plans and designs are finally approved by the Executive Engineer, the licensing authority may grant permission in writing to the applicant to install the cinema in accordance with the approved plans and designs provided that such permission shall not dispense with the necessity of obtaining the requisite sanction under the Punjab Local Government Act, 1975 or any other law for the time being in force.
   (3) No modifications in the plans and design. during construction shall be made unless such modifications are approved by the licensing authority in consultation with the Executive Engineer.
   (4) The Executive Engineer may at any time but shall at least once a month, inspect a cinema which is under construction with a view to satisfying himself that the construction is according to the approved plans, designs and specifications. If any deviations are found, the Executive Engineer shall report the same to the licensing authority and also inform the applicant.
4. Application for grant or renewal of licence.‑(1) Application for the grant or renewal of a licence shall be in writing and shall be signed by the applicant.
   (2) Application for the grant, as distinct from the renewal of an annual licence, shall be accompanied by‑
   (a) a true copy of the 'No‑Objection Certificate' granted under rule 3 ;
   (b) full particulars regarding the ownership of and all rights in the premises and in the cinematograph apparatus to be used therein ;
   (c) complete plans, elevations, and sections in duplicate, of the premises and of all erections and buildings thereon drawn correctly to the scale of one- eighth of an inch to one foot and showing the width of all stairways and the number of steps in each the width of corridors, gangways & doorways, the height of the cinematograph and of the plan for the generation or conversion of electrical energy ;
   (d) complete structural designs duly printed ;
   (e) a site plan in duplicate on a separate sheet drawn to the scale of one fortieth of an inch to one foot showing the position of the premises in relation to any adjacent premises and to the public thoroughfares upon which the premises abut and the arrangements proposed for the parking of motor cars and other vehicles ;
   (f ) specifications of the various materials to be used in the construction of the cinema building.
   (3) The cardinal points of the compass shall be shown on the plans and the plans shall be so coloured as to distinguish the material used in the cons truction of the building.
   (4) Applications under sub‑rule (2) shall be submitted to the District Magistrate before any alterations necessary for the adaptation of an existing premises for cinematograph exhibitions are taken in hand and in the case of a new building before its construction is begun. '
   (5) The licensing authority may require an applicant for a temporary permit to furnish such plan of the premises and such specification as it may consider necessary.
   CHAPTER III‑BUILDING
5. An annual licence shall only be granted or renewed in respect of a cinema building which as regards its location, structure, fittings, electrical and other equipment complies with the provisions of the Rules ;
   Provided that the provisions of rules 7(1), 9(1) and (2), 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 20(1) and (5), 21, 22(3), (4), and (5), 25(1), 56 and 69 may be relaxed by Government in any particular case to such extent and subject to such condi tions as it may think fit;
   Provided further that in the case of an 'open air cinema' relaxation referred to in the above proviso and also in respect of provisions of rule 20 (sub‑rules 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7), 22(6) and 26(3) and (4) may be granted by the District Magistrate in consultation with the Executive Engineer, wherever necessary, without reference to Government.
   7.‑‑(1) A licence shall not be granted under rule 6 in respect of a build ing unless it abuts upon or has frontage of adequate length, to two or more public ways or open spaces of such width as will enable the persons who are to be accommodated in the building to disperse quickly in the event of fire or panic and permit the approach of fire engines up to the building and from where there are at all times free means of exit;
   Provided that one of such public ways or open spaces shall be a thorough road having a clear width of not less than thirty‑five feet inclusive of foot paths, if any.
   (2) The frontage shall be considered of adequate length if it forms about th of the total perimeter of the site of the building excluding recesses and projections.
6. No portion of the cinema building shall be occupied or used as a factory or workshop or for storage purposes or as a hotel or for residential purposes or for the preparation or sale of food or drink except as the District Magistrate may by written order permit.
   9.‑(1) The cinema building shall have external and partition walls of bricks, stone, corrugated iron or concrete.
   (2) Where the cinema building is in close proximity to another building, it shall be separated therefrom by walls and structures of fire resisting materials in a manner approved by the District Magistrate and no openings in the walls or in any part of the cinema building such as may be liable to communication of fire shall overlook a neighbouring building.
   (3) Any opening in the cinema building overlooking an adjacent site upon which an inflammable structure is erected or upon which inflammable material is stored shall be protected to the satisfaction of the District Magistrate.
7. All floors, galleries, tires, etc. to be fire proof.‑All floors, galleries, tires, posts columns, joints, trusses. stairways and landings in the cinema building shall be of fire resisting material.
8. Partitions.‑All partitions in the cinema building shall be made of fire resisting material or of wood not less than 1‑3/4' thick and certified by the Executive Engineer to be hard wood.
9. Ceilings and Panelling.‑All ceilings and panelling in the cinema building shall be made of fire resisting material or of compressed or synthetic material treated against flaming which has been certified by the Executive Engineer to be suitable for the purpose intended.
   13.‑(1) Stability of floors galleries, landings and corridors.‑All floors in the cinema building including galleries, landings and corridors with their supports shall be capable of supporting a static load of one hundred pounds per square foot and as in alternative loading, every step or landing shall be strong enough to support a point load of three hundred pounds placed in any position: provided further that the load on slab or floor boards per foot width uniformly distributed should be taken as not less than 800 lbs, and the load on beams uniformly distributed shall be assumed as to be not less than 6,400 lbs. For loading on roofs and areas other than those specified above, the Executive Engineer shall determine the loading value to be considered in accordance with 'British Standard Code of Practice' C P‑3 Chapter V (1952).
   (2) Test loading shall be carried out by the Executive Engineer for testing floors, galleries, landings and corridors of all newly constructed cinemas after the expiry of 56 days of effective hardening of the concrete.
   (3) Once the test loading of floors, galleries, landings and corridors of any cinema has been carried out future test loading may be carried only when the Executive Engineer has good reasons to believe that the structure has become 'suspect'. The Executive Engineer shall have to record reasons for necessity of the test loading. In case of dispute, an appeal shall lie with the Superintending Engineer. Notwithstanding above, in case of all cinemas constructed after the Promulgation of these Rules the test loading shall be carried out once in 5 years.
   (4) In such tests, the structure shall be subjected to a superimpose load equal to one and a quarter times the specified super imposed load used for design and this load shall be maintained for a period of 24 hours before removal. During the teat, struts strong enough to take the whole load shall be placed in position leaving a gap under the members. If within 24 hours of the removal of the loads the structure does not show a recovery of at least 75 per cent. of the maximum deflection shown during the 24 hours under load, the tea! loading shall be repeated. The structure shall be considered to have failed to pass the test if the recovery after the second test is not at least 75 per cent. of the maximum deflection shown during the second test, or upon removal of the load, the structure shows signs of weakness undue deflection or faulty construction, I shall be reconstructed or strengthened as necessary and to the satisfaction of the Executive Engineer.
10. Height of tiers.‑Where the first tier or gallery extends over the stalls, the height between the floor of the stalls and such tier or gallery shall not in any part be less than ten feet, the height between the floor of the highest part of the gallery and the lowest part of the ceiling over the same shall not in any part be less than twelve feet, the height between any tier and the tier of ceiling above it shall, in no case, be less than eight feet.
11. Dimensions of the projection room and the booking offices.‑The following dimensions are prescribed for projection rooms and booking offices :‑-----
    (o) Projection room----‑
    Area Height Remarks
    252 s.ft. minimum 10 ft. It shall have at least
    width not less than two ventilators. Total
    10 ft. space 4 sq. ft. each.
    (b) Booking office (single)
    24 s.ft. 8 ft. It shall have at least
    one ventilator with
    total space of 4 s.ft.
    (c) Booking office (double)
    40 s.ft. 8 ft. It shall have at least
    two ventilators.
    Total space 4 s.ft.
    each.
12. Building compound to be adequately drained.‑(1) The cinema build ing and its compound, if any, shall be adequately drained to the satisfaction of the District Magistrate.
    (2) If the lowest floor of the cinema building is constructed at a lower level so that it cannot be drained by gravity, the cinema owner shall provide suitable pumping arrangement to pump out water or sewerage so that it could be finally disposed of by gravity.
13. Scale o/' accommodations fn the auditorium.\_(I) Accommodation shall not be provided in any part of the auditorium at a higher scale than 20 persons per 100 sq. feet exclusive of passages.
    (2) A notice showing the number of spectators permitted by the conditions of the licence to be admitted to each separate part of the auditorium, shall be exhibited at a prominent place either at the entrance of the building or in the auditorium.
    (3) For each separate part of the auditorium the licensee shall issue separate admission tickets bearing serial numbers and the number of the performance on the foils and counter‑foils, and after each performance She ticket books shall be marked "closed" on the last counter‑foil issued.
14. Seating arrangement.‑(I) The seating in the cinema building shall be so arranged that there is free access to exits.
    (2) The seating space in the auditorium assigned for each person shall not be less than 2 ft. 4 inches deep where seats with backs are provided and not less than 2 ft. deep where seats without backs are provided and not less than 1 ft: 8 inches wide where seats with arms are provided and not less than 1 ft. 6 inches where seats without arms are provided.
    (3) The rows of seats shall be so arranged that there is a clear space of not less than one foot between the back of one seat and the foremost portion .of the seat behind.
    (4) All seats, except those in private boxes, shall be securely fixed to the floor and, if battended together or made in links, complete link shall be firmly attached to the floor.
    (5) Chairs with folding seats shall be provided wherever required by the .District Magistrate.
    (6) Where benches are provided, the benches shall have arms suitably fixed ,o that each seat is separate.
    (7) The minimum distance between the cinematograph screen and the front row of seats shall not be less than 25 feet.
    (8) The seats in the auditorium excepting those contained in private boxes shall be arranged in the manner of an arc, the concave edge of which shall face the screen;
    Provided that such seating arrangement shall not be applicable in the case of a cinema constructed before 28th December 1965 and until such time as the cinema is reconstructed or material addition or alteration is made in it.
15. Furniture, carpets and matting, etc. ‑The furniture, carpets, matting and other covering in the auditorium shall at all time maintained by the licensee in a satisfactory state of repairs and the licensee shall replace any items of furniture, carpets, matting or other covering which Wave become worn out or cannot be satisfactorily repaired.
16. Gangways.‑(1) Gangway not less than 48 inches wide shall be provided in the cinema building as follows;----
    (a) down each side of the auditorium ;
    (b) down the centre of the ‑seating accommodation at intervals of not more than 25 feet ;
    (c) parallel to the line of the seating so as to provide direct access to exits provided that not less than one gangway for every 10 rows shall be required; and
    (d) each gangway shall be it with foot‑light.
    (2) Ail gangways, exits and trades of steps and stairways shall be lined with Lon‑slippery surfaces.
    (3) Druggists, matting and Boor covering, if provided in gangways, shall `be securely fastened to the floors.
    (4) The exits and gangways and passages leading to exits shall be kept clear of ail obstructions other than rope barriers provided in accordance with sub‑rule (6) provided that such rows have no exit from that point and on no account shall any seats be placed in the gangways or spectators be allowed to stand in the gangways at the time of a cinematograph exhibition.
    (5) If steps have to be inserted in gangway or passage they shall be of uniform width and height. There shall be not less than three steps at any one place. The treads shall not be less than 15 inches wide and risers not more than 7 inches high.
    (6) Rope barriers in gangways or elsewhere shall be fitted with clips or fastenings which shall part in the centre on slight pressure and shall not trail on the floor.
    (7) Guard rails not less than 3 feet 6 inches above floor level shall be provided on the parapet at the foot of gangways in the galleries where the incline of the gangway exceeds 15 degrees.
17. Gallery or upper floor.‑(I) Every gallery or upper floor in the cinema building intended for use by the public shall be accessible by at least two stairways, each not less than five feet wide. If there is a door it shall have clear opening of five feet.
    (2) Treads and risers.‑The treads and risers on each flight of stair& shall be of uniform width and height and the treads shall not be less than 12 inches wide and the risers shall not be less than 6 inches and more than 7 inches high.
    (3) There shall be no winders.
    (4) A continuous hand‑rail shall be fitted to each side of the stairways.
    (5) No stairways shall discharge into passage or corridor against or across, the direction of an exit.
18. Exits.‑41) Every portion of the cinema building to which the public are admitted shall be provided with an adequate number of clearly indicated exits place in such position and so maintained as to afford the audience ample means of safe and speedy egress.
    (2) In the auditorium, there shall be at least one exit from every tier, floor or gallery for every 100 persons or part thereof for which accommodation is, provided therein;
    Provided that from every upper floor or gallery, there shall be not less than two exits ;
    Provided further that an exit on or by way of a stage or platform shall. not be reckoned as one of the exits required by this rule.
    (3) Every exit from the auditorium shall provide a clear opening space of not less than 7 feet high and 5 feet wide including door frame except boxes. The boxes shall have doors with a clear opening space of not less than 6 feet high and 3 feet wide including door frame.
    (4) Exits from the auditorium shall be suitably spaced along both side& and shall deliver into two or more different thoroughfares or open spaces from which there are at all times free means of rapid dispersal. However, the width of gangway shall remain not less than 48 inches as per rule 20.
    (5) Every passage or corridor leading from an exit in the auditorium tot a final place of exit from the cinema building shall be of such width as well, in the opinion of District Magistrate, enable the persons who are likely to use i6 in an emergency to leave the cinema building without any danger of crowding or congestion, and at no point shall any such passage or corridor be less than 5 feet wide except boxes, nor shall it diminish in the direction of the final place of exit. The width of the passage into which boxes open shall not. however, be less than 3 feet.
    (6) The combined width of the final places of exit from the cinema building shall be such that there is at least ‑5 feet of exit width for every 100 persons that can be accommodated in the building.
    (7) All exit doors shall open outwards and shall be so fitted that when opened they do not obstruct any gangway, passage, corridor, stairway or landing.
    (8) All exit doors and doors through which the public have to pass on the way to the open air shall be available for exit during the whole time that the public are in the cinema building and during such time they shall not be locked or bolted.
    (9) The attendant incharge of each exit door leading from the auditorium shall be provided with an electric torch of adequate strength and it shall be his duty to guide the spectators to the seats. It shall also be his duty to throw open the door in case of any emergency.
    (10) All exits from the auditorium and all doors or openings (other than the main entrance) intended for egress from the cinema building shall be clearly indicated by the word 'EXIT' in block letters not less than seven inches high and so displayed as to be clearly visible in the light as well as in the dark.
    (11) All other doors or openings in the cinema building shall be so cons tructed as to be clearly distinguishable from exits and may be indicated by the wore, 'NO THOROUGHFARE' but notice bearing the words 'NO EXIT' shall not be used in any part of the building.
    (12) All exit doors and doors through which the public have to pass on the way to open air shall be thrown open immediately after the exhibition is over.
19. No obstruction in exits.‑Pay boxes, check boxes and attendants seats shall be fixed in such position in the cinema building that they do not obstruct means of exit, and any mirror, pictures, notices or advertisements attached to or hung upon the walls shall be so placed as not to cause obstruction to exit and shall be fixed flat against the wall or kept clear of the head line i e. seven feet above the floor.
    24.‑(1) Provision shall not be made in the corridors, passages and stair ways of the cinema building for hanging hats and cloaks.
    (2) Where cloak rooms sit, however, provided they shall be so situated that the persons using them will not interfere with the free use of any exit.
20. Ventilation.‑(1) The combined area of the window, door and ventilator openings in the cinema building shall not be less than one‑fifth of the total floor area.
    (2) Arrangements shall be made for the air‑conditioning of a cinema building (both heating and cooling) ;
    Provided that if arrangements for sir‑conditioning are not made the annual licence shall not be granted or renewed without the previous sanction of the Government.
    (3) Unless the auditorium is air‑conditioned the means of ventilation shall take tie form of natural ventilation and mechanical appliances such as suitably located exhaust fans capable of expelling air the rate of 500 cft. or more per person at least three times in an hour. In the case of air-conditioned cinema, the plant of one ten will be reckoned for every 12 to 14 persons.
    (4) Ceiling Fans.‑Electric ceiling fans shill be provided in the auditorium of an air‑conditioned cinema at suitable locations at the rate of one 56 inches sweep bracket ceiling fan for 30 persons. Electric ceiling fans shall also be provided in the auditorium of non‑air‑conditioned cinema and in an open air cinema at suitable locations and the number and size if such fans shall be determined by the Electric Inspector.
    (5) Where natural ventilation is provided by windows or sky‑lights which have to be darkened or obscured, free permanent top ventilation shall be arranged by means of ridge or ceiling ventilators.
    (6) Unless the auditorium is air‑conditioned, after each performance the whole of the auditorium shall be completely flushed with air for a duration of not less than twenty minutes.
21. Latrines and urinals.‑(1) The cinema building and its compound, if any, shall be kept free from effluvia arising from drain, privy or other nuisance.
    (2) Separate latrines and urinals for the use of males and females shall be provided at suitable places in or near the cinema building.
    (3) Latrines and urinals shall be provided at the rate of not less than one per cent. and two per cent. respectively, of the seating capacity of the auditorium, and they shall be so constructed as to cause no nuisance.
    (4) Where the auditorium extends over an upper floor, a minimum of one urinal for each sex shall be provided there.
    (5) The latrines and urinals shall be cleaned or flushed immediately before and after each performance and shall be washed with phenyle or other sanitary fluid at least twice a day.
22. Additions and alterations.‑(1) No addition to or alteration of any portion of the licensed premises, whether necessitated as a result or fire or any other cause, shall be made without the sanction of the District Magistrate.
    (2) The licence shall give notice in writing to the District Magistrate of his intention to make any such addition or alteration and such notice shall be accompanied by complete Plans, elevations, sections and specifications of the work proposed to be executed drawn up in duplicate in the manner prescribed rules 4 and 70 (2) ; provided that in the case of premises for which a temporary licence has been granted only such plans and specifications shall be furnished as the District Magistrate may consider necessary.
    (3) The work shall not be commenced until the consent of the District Magistrate has been obtained, and the District Magistrate shall not give his consent unless the Executive Engineer certifies that the proposed addition or alteration is in accordance with these rules.
    (4) No addition to or alteration of any part of the cinematograph and its appurtenances or the lighting or other electric arrangements in the licensed premises shall be made without the sanction of the District Magistrate.
    (5) ?he licensee shall give notice in writing to the District Magistrate of his intention to make any such addition or alteration as contemplated in sub-rule (4) and the District Magistrate shall not give sanction thereto unless the Electric Inspector or an Officer deputed by him for the purpose certifies that the addition or alteration is in accordance with the provisions of these rules.
23. Notice for repairs or redecorations.‑Notice in writing shall be given by the licensee to the District Magistrate of his intention to carry out repairs or redecorations in the licensed premises necessitating the use of scaffolding, cradles or plant giving full details of the position thereof, if it is intended that the public shall be admitted while such scaffolding, cradle or plant are in position or in use, and if the District Magistrate shall so require the promises shall be closed to the public until the work has been completed and the scaffolding, cradles and plant removed.
    CHAPTER IV. LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION
24. illumination.‑(1) No illuminant other than electric lights shall be used in any part of the cinema building.
    (2) Provision shall be made for adequate illumination of the auditorium and the exits therefrom to the outside of the cinema building, including any passages corridor, landings and stairways and the notices indicating the position of exits from all parts of the cinema building to which the public are admitted.
    (3) During the whole time the public are present in the cinema building the lighting for purposes other than the illumination of the auditorium, shall be in operation sufficiently to enable the public to see clearly their way out.
25. Auditorium to be provided with independent lighting circuits.‑ (1) The auditorium shall be provided with two independent lighting circuits taken from the main source of supply in the building
    (2) Ono circuit (hereinafter referred to as the general lighting circuit) which must not enter the enclosure may include all, exit signs and the lighting of all parts of the building to which the public are admitted sand the other (hereinafter referred to a, the emergency lighting circuit) shall be used exclu sive for the lighting of the auditorium and shall be controlled from convenient position within the enclosure.
    (3) The two circuits shall not be combined in one fitting nor shall the wires or leads for one circuit to placed in the same casing or tube as those of the other circuit.
26. Emergency lighting.‑(1) The emergency lighting circuit shall supply such number of the lighting and mess shall be fixed in such position as may be determined by the Electric Inspector. God the lights shall be so arranged as to avoid a single fault extinguishing all the lights
    (2) Two way control from both within and without the enclosure shall be provided for the emergency lighting circuit, the control from outside being suitably indicated and mounted on a different board from those on which any of the general lighting circuits are mounted and placed in such a position as to be readily handled by a member of the cinema staff but inaccessible to the public.
    (3) In the event of failure of total supply of cinema premises, special flood lights to be termed as 'emergency lights', at least 3 in number, worked on rechargeable batteries or any other arrangement as determined by the Electric Inspector, shall be kept available for instant use in the auditorium.
27. Separate circuit for cinematograph are lamp.‑(1) A separate and distinct circuit shall be provided for the supply of energy to cinematograph are lamp lantern and such circuit shall be controlled by a suitable main switch and fuse required in pursuance of rule 34, and there shall be in addition for each are lamp a totally enclosed double pole iron‑clad switch and fuse placed in a convenient position within the enclosure.
    (2) When the cinematograph lamp is working the electrical pressure across the terminals of the double pole switch shall not exceed 220/230 volts.
28. Separate circuit for ceiling fans.‑A separate and .distinct circuit shall be provided for the supply of energy to ceiling fans.
29. Main switches.‑(1) Separate main switches and main cut‑outs shall be provided as near as possible to the source of supply of energy in the cinema building for the general, emergency, projector and enclosure circuits and for all fan circuits provided that the emergency and enclosure lighting main switches and cut‑outs shall be suitably indicated and mounted on separate bounds.
    (2) All main switches, meters and other electrical apparatus installed near the source of supply of energy in the cinema building shall be housed fn a separate enclosure used exclusively for the purpose and inaccessible to the public.
30. Wiring.‑(1) Wiring within the enclosure and for emergency lighting circuit shall be in screwed oiling except that where flexible portion shall be either steel armoured or enclosed in suitable flexible metallic steel tubing.
    (2) There shall be no unnecessary slack electric cable within the enclosure and all cable‑runs shall be as short and direct as possible.
    (3) In the case of 'open air cinemas' wiring exposed to weather shall be encased in metallic water‑tight piping and the fittings. securely fastened, and where weather proof cables are used, the same shall not be installed at a height greater than ten feet from floor level and shall either be supported by bearer wiring or property fixed.
31. Switches, cut‑outs, resistances, etc. shall be of fire resisting material---. All switches, cut‑outs, resistances, lights, fans and all other electrical appliances in the enclosure shall be mounted on basis of fire resisting materials and where practicable shall have strong metallic covers enclosing all live parts, and switch covers shall be arranged in such a way that they cannot be opened unless the switch is in the 'off' position.
32. Earthing.‑(I) All metal work supporting or protecting electric supply lines shall be efficiently earthed by two separate and distinct connections with the earth.
    (2) The resistance of the connections with the earth shall not exceed five ohm and all earthing leads shall run in such a manner that the course of each may be readily traceable.
    (3) Where earthing leads pass through walls or are laid in the floors they shall be suitably protected.
33. Resistances.‑Resistances shall be made entirely of fire resisting material and shall be so constructed and maintained that no coil or other part shall at any time become so heated that a piece of paper placed in contact with any part of the resistance would readily ignite and all resist ances, with the exception of the resistance for regulating purpose, shall be placed outside the enclosure and in a part of the cinema building to which the public are not admitted.
34. Fittings or apparatus.‑All suspended fittings or apparatus other than small single lamp pendants fitted at a height of less than 10 feet above the floor level of parts of the cinema building to which the public are admitted, shall be provided with satisfactory means of suspension independent of the conductors.
35. Plant for generation of electrical energy.‑Plant for the oration of electrical energy or for cooling purposes oil engines or other prime movers, main circuit transformers, converters or rectifiers shall be placed in a compartment or compartments the construction and location of which shall be subject to the approval of the Electric Inspector.
36. Electric accumulators.‑Electric accumulators, unless installed in rooms or compartments specially reserved therefor, shall be completely enclosed together with their terminals in substantial casing constructed or lined with insulating and fire resisting material. Accumulators in cells or containers of celluloid shall not be installed, stored or used.
37. Electric heaters and radiators.‑(1) Electric heaters or radiators shall not be used in any part of the cinema building to which the public are admitted except with the consent of the Electric Inspector and subject to such conditions as he may prescribe.
    (2) Are lamps shall not be used in the auditorium or in any part of the cinema building open to the public without the permission of the Electric Inspector ; and when they are used in any such part special precautions shall be taken to guard against danger from falling glass and incandescent particles of carbon.
38. Electric diagram.‑A framed diagram or schedule indicating clearly the arrangements of all circuits and sub‑circuits of the electrical installations, the position of the distribution boards and the sizes of cables shall be displayed in the cinema building and shall be kept up‑to‑date.
39. Electrician.‑The electrical installations shall be in the charge of a properly qualified electrician, approved by the Electric Inspector, during the whole of the time the public are in the cinema building.
40. Electric torches.‑‑At least six electric torches of not less than two cells each shall be kept on the licensed premises in proper working order throughout the year and these shall be supplied to the attendants .and members of the staff for general use and emergency purposes and at least one pair of rubber gloves and rubber soled shoes in good order shall be kept on the premises for every electrician employed therein.
41. Instructions for the restoration of persons affected by electric shock.--- Instructions for the restoration of persons suffering from electric shock shall be displayed conspicuously at a suitable place in the licensed premises.
42. Lighting conductor.---The cinema building (except open air cinemas) ,shall be provided with a lighting conductor.
43. Electrical specifications.‑‑Save as otherwise specially provided in these rules, vie electrical installation in a cinema building shall be in accordance with such specifications as the Government may from time to time prescribe by notification.
44. Gas and water pipes.‑Gas and water pipes shall not in any way form part of any electrical circuits.
45. Lay‑out of electrical installation.‑(1) Before the electrical installation. work in a new cinema building is commenced, the cinema management shall be required to submit a detailed lay‑out of electrical installations for all the circuits in a cinema building particulars and sizes of metallic piping, and cables, capacities of iron clad switches, load per circuit, alongwith the particulars of the licensed wiring contractor engaged for the above purpose, for approval by the Electric Inspector.
    (2) The Electric Inspector may, at any time, inspect the cinema building during the course of execution of electrical installation work with a view satisfying himself that the electrical installation work is being carried out in accordance with the lay‑out already approved by him. If any deviations are found, the Electric Inspector shall point out the same to the owner of the cinema for necessary compliance with a copy thereof to the licensing authority‑
46. Stage dramas/performances.‑Before any drama or other such performance is staged in a cinema auditorium, the use of electrical installation of temporary nature for the above purposes shall be subject to prior inspection and approval by the Electric Inspector.
47. Relaxation.‑The electrical installation in cinemas shall be carried out to the satisfaction of the Electric Inspector who may in writing recom mend to the licensing authority that any of the provisions of these rules may be relaxed to such extent and subject to such conditions as he may consider expedient.
    CHAPTER V‑PRECAUTION AGAINST FIRE
48. Fire‑extinguishing appliance.‑ (1) Fire extinguishing appliances suitable to the character of the cinema building and of a pattern, class and capacity approved by the District Magistrate, shall be kept in the cinema building so as to be readily available for use in case of fire in any part of the building.
    (2) Fire buckets.‑Adequate means of dealing with fire, including wet blankets, portable chemical fire‑extinguishers and buckets filled with dry sand and water in such number and of such description, as the licensing authority may direct, shall at all times be readily available within the enclosure.
    (3) Fire‑extinguishers.‑All fire‑extinguishing appliances shall at all times be maintained in proper working order and available for instant use, and all chemical fire‑extinguishers shall be capable of withstanding a pressure of not less than 250lbs. per square inch and all the fire‑extingui shing appliances shall be put to pressure test every year and proper certificate obtained therefor from a firm or organization duly authorised by the Electric Inspector to issue such certificates.
    (4) The fee for the grant of authority to a firm/organization for testing the chemical fire‑extinguisher in a cinema building and issuing. necessary pressure test certificate shall be Rs. 500 and the fee for the renewal of Authority after every year shall be Rs. 100.
    (5) Person incharge of fire‑extinguishing appliances.‑During a cinema tography exhibition all fire‑extinguishing appliances shall be in the charge of a person fully trained in fire‑extinguishing methods and possessing a certificate of such training from a fire‑brigade station maintained by a local authority or such other organization as Government may specify is this behalf.
    (6) In places where there is a public telephone system, the cinema building shall be connected by telephone with the nearest fire‑brigade station.
    CHAPTER VI‑ENCLOSURE FOR CINEMATOGRAPH APPARATUS
49. Enclosure.‑The cinematograph apparatus shall be placed in an enclosure of substantial construction the dimensions of which shall be such that when the cinematograph apparatus and other necessary fittings are installed therein, there is sufficient space to allow the operators to work freely.
50. Enclosure to be self‑contained.‑The enclosure shall be entirely self‑contained and shall house only the cinematograph apparatus, fire appliances and such controlling apparatus as must of necessity be placed therein.
51. Enclosure to have one entrance.‑The enclosure shall have only one entrance to which the spectators have no access and which shall be fitted with a self‑closing door.
52. Enclosures fittings, coverings and openings:‑‑‑The enclosure and any fittings, covering and openings thereto shall be made of fire‑resisting material and shall be so designed, constructed and maintained as to prevent, as far as possible, when all openings are closed, fire or smoke from the enclosure spreading to any other part of the cinema building.
53. Means of ventilation.‑Proper and efficient means of ventilation shall be provided in the enclosure in such a manner that there is no communication with any part of the cinema building to which the public are admitted through the medium of such means of ventilation.
54. Number and size of openings in enclosure.‑(1) The number of openings to front of the enclosure per projection machine shall not exceed two projection openings and one inspection opening, each not more than 81 square inches.
    (2) All such openings shall be equipped with screens of fire‑resisting material and shall be so operated that only one projection opening and one inspection opening remain open at any one time and shall be so constructed that all openings can be automatically closed from convenient positions both from inside and outside the enclosure,
55. Use of synchoronous machine.‑No non‑ synchoronous machine shall be placed in or operated from the enclosure.
56. Operator.‑No person other than the qualified operators, described in rule 10l or an apprentice duly authorised by the licensee under rule 107 shall be allowed to enter or be in the enclosure while an exhibition is in progress.
57. No smoking and inflammable article.‑(I) No inflammable article shall be taken into or allowed to remain in the enclosure.
    (2) No smoking shall at any time be permitted within the enclosure and no naked light shall be used therein.
    (3) A notice shall prominently exhibited both inside and outside the enclosure to the effect smoking is prohibited.
58. Cinematograph projector.----Cinematograph projectors shall be placed on firm supports constructed of fire resisting material and shall . be provided with a metal shutter between the film fate and the source of light so constructed that the shutter shall immediately drop in the event of ,any accident to the cinematograph apparatus or stoppage of the film and ..shall automatically rise when the film is in motion for the purpose of projection.
59. Film gate.‑The film gate shall be of massive construction and .‑ shall be provided with the ample beat‑radiating surface. The passage for the film shall be sufficiently narrow to prevent flame travelling up wards or downwards from the light opening.
60. Film box.‑(1) Cinematograph projectors shall be fitted with two metal film boxes of substantial construction, to and from which the film .shall be made to travel.
    (2) The film boxes shall be made to close in such manner and shall be fitted with film slots so constructed as to prevent the passage of flame into the interior of the film box.
61. Rewinding of films.‑Rewinding of films shall not be carried on in the enclosure except with automatic rewinder fitted along the projectors.
62. Storage of films.‑During a cinematograph exhibition all films not actually in use shall be kept in closed metal boxes or containers.
63. Separate room for rewinding of Films.‑(1) A separate room shall be provided for the rewinding of films and shall be constructed of fire resisting material and the rewinding of films shall be done in that room only. No other combustible or inflammable material shall be kept therein.
    (2) Fittings and fixtures of rewinding room.‑All fittings and fixtures in the rewinding room shall be constructed of fire resisting material and the entrance to the room shall be provided with a self‑closing and close fitting door and shall not communicate directly with the enclosure and the auditorium or any part of building to which the public are admitted or have access.
64. Film spools.‑Film spools shall be driven by means of chains, gears or belts of fire resisting material and film shall be so wound thereon that the wound film shall not at any time reach or project beyond the edges of the flanges of the film spools.
    CHAPTER VIII‑PROCEDURE FOR THE GRANT OF CINEMA LICENCE
65. Application for Cinema licence.‑(0 No person under eighteen years of age shall be entitled to obtain or hold any licence under these rules.
    (2) Every application for the grant or renewal of a licence shall be in writing and shall be signed by the applicant;
66. Grant of cinema licence. ‑ (1) Licence granted under subsection (31 .of the Act shall be either annual or temporary.
    (2) A licence granted under sub‑rule (1) shall not be transferable except with the written permission of the District Magistrate and on the death of the licensee it shall stand revoked.
67. Licence shall be in Form 'B'.----‑Licences whether annual or temporary, shall be in Form 'B' and shall be subject to the conditions and restrictions set forth therein and to the provisions of these rules.
68. Duration of licence.‑(1) An annual licence shall only be granted in accordance with the provisions of the rules in Chapter III and in respect of a building permanently equipped for cinematograph exhibition. It shall be valid for one year from the date of issue and shall be renewable on application being made by the licensee.
    (2) Subject to the provisions contained in Chapter X of these Rules, a temporary licence may be granted by the District Magistrate in respect of any village, town or city for exhibition by means of a touring cinema tograph subject to the following conditions ; ‑
    (a) no temporary licence shall be granted in respect of a town op municipality where one or more permanent cinemas are functioning ; and
    (b) save with the sanction of the Commissioner of the Division, and unless Government otherwise directs. no. temporary licence shall be granted to any one person for any one village, town or city for a period exceeding ninety days in a calendar year and no licences for touring cinematographs shall be granted in respect of any village, town or city for periods which taken together make an. aggregate period exceeding one hundred and eighty days during a year.
69. Application for renewal of licence.‑An application for the renewal of an annual licence shall be made at least two months before the date of expiry of the licence;
    Provided that the District Magistrate may, where the application for renewal is not made two months before the expiry of the old licence, renew the licence on payment of the fee chargeable for a new licence.
70. Power to grant or refuse the licence.‑(1) If, on an application for the renewal of an annual licence, the District Magistrate does not for any reasons, before the date of expiry of the licence, either renew the licence or refuse to renew the same, he may grant a temporary permit in Form 'C.
    (2) Such temporary permit shall be subject to the condition of the licence sought to be renewed and shall be valid for such period not exceeding three months as the District Magistrate may direct ;
    Provided that the temporary permit shall cease to be valid and shall be surrendered to the District Magistrate by the applicant receiving his licence duly renewed, or on his receiving an order refusing to renew the licence.
71. Validity of temporary permit.‑The temporary permit shall be deemed to be a licence for the purpose of these rules.
72. Fee of temporary permit.‑The fee for the grant of a temporary permit shall be levied at the rate of Rs. 750 per mensem;
    Provided that if in the opinion of the District Magistrate, the grant of temporary permit has been due to any cause other than the negligence of the licence, the fee or any part thereof may be remitted by the District Magistrate.
73. Period of temporary permit.‑The period of the temporary permit shall count towards the period for which the licence is sought to be renewed.
74. Fees for the grant and renewal of licence and for inspection.‑The following fees shall be charged for the grant or renewal of licence and for the inspection under these rules :‑
    TABLE OF FEES Ra.
    (1) For the grant of an annual licence ............................ .................. 10,000
    (2) For the renewal of an annual licence ................... 6,000
    (3) For a temporary licence for touring cinema,
    for each week or part of a week .................................. ...................... 60
    (4) For a duplicate of an annual licence ......................... ...................... 50
    (5) For each inspection, other than the first one,
    by the Executive Engineer in connection
    with the grant of an annual licence ................................. ..................... 400
    (6) For each inspection, other than the first one,
    with the renewal of an annual licence ..................... 400
    (7) For each inspection, other than the first one,
    by the Electric Inspector in connection with
    the grant of an annual licence . . ..................... 400
    (8) For each inspection, other than the first one,
    the renewal of an annual licence .................................... ..................... 400
    (9) For each inspection, other than the first one,
    by the Electric Inspector of a touring
    cinematograph . ........................................................... ..................... 200
    Note.‑No fee shall be charged for the first inspection.
    CHAPTER IX‑INSPECTION
75. Inspection by Executive Engineer and Electric Inspector.‑(1) Before granting, recommending for being granted or renewing an annual licence in respect of any building, the District Magistrate shall‑
    (a) Call upon the Executive Engineer to‑
    (i) examine the structural features of the building and report whether the rues relating thereto have been duly complied with ;
    (ii) report whether the seating and other arrangements in the auditorium; are in accordance with the provisions of rules 18 and 20 ; and
    (iii) report whether the furniture, carpets, matting or other floor covering are a satisfactory state of repairs.
    (b) Call upon the Electric Inspector to‑
    (i) examine the cinematograph and the electrical equipment to be used in the building and to report whether they comply with the requirements of these rules and of the Electricity Act, 1910 ;
    (ii) report whether all reasonable precautions have been taken to protect spectators and employees from electric shock and to prevent the introduction of fire into the building through the use of electrical equipment;. and
    (iii) report whether the prescribed fire‑extinguishing appliances have been provided, and are in working order and suitable for purpose for which they are intended;
    Provided that in case of dispute between the Executive Engineer and Cinema Owner, an appeal shall lie with the Superintending Engineer under whose jurisdiction the Executive Engineer is working and it shall be made through the District Magistrate.
    (2) Defects revealed by such inspections shall be brought to the notice of the applicant or licensee and also reported to the District Magistrate, who may refuse to grant, recommend for being granted or renew the licence ualess and until the defects are remedied to his satisfaction.
76. Inspection by the District Magistrate.‑The Licensing Authority or any officer authorised by him in this behalf may, at any tine, enter a place which it or he has reason to believe is being used or is intended to be used for the purpose of cinematograph exhibitions, in order to satisfy itself or himself that the provisions of section 3 of the Act, the rules framed there under and the conditions of the licence are being complied with.
77. Inspection by the Electric Inspector.‑(1) The Electric Inspector or any officer specially appointed to assist him in this behalf may, at any time, enter and Inspect any licensed premises.
    (2) Defects revealed by such inspections shall be brought to the notice of the licensee and shall also be reported to the District Magistrate.
78. Sanitary inspection.‑(1) The District Magistrate may, by general or special order, authorise a medical officer to inspect the sanitary conditions of any licensed premises and such officer may visit all parts of the premises for purposes of such inspection at any time except when an exhibition its in progress.
    (2) Defects revealed by such inspections shall be brought to the notice of the licensee and also reported to the District Magistrate.
79. The Director, Health Services, Punjab or any officer deputed by him in this behalf, may inspect the sanitary conditions of any licensed premises and report any defects found by him to the District Magistrate.
80. Production of licence.‑The licensee shall on demand by the Licensing Authority or by any officer authorised by it or by these rules in this behalf, produce for inspection his licence and the plan of the licensed premises.
81. Inspection of touring cinematograph.‑(1) Touting cinematograph used for giving public exhibition shall be brought for the purposes of annual inspection by the Electric Inspector to a town where a licence under the Electricity Act, 1910, has been granted ;
    Provided that such cinematograph shall be inspected at site if electrical generating sets are available there.
    (2) If after an inspection under sub‑role (1) the Electric Inspector is satisfied that a touring cinematograph can be used without danger to the public he shall issue a certificate to that effect.
82. Arrangements for Inspection.‑The District Magistrate or any officer authorised by him in this behalf, may at any time inspect the film which is proposed to be exhibited in the licensed premises, and the licensee shall make such arrangements for the inspection thereof as the inspecting officer shay require.
    CHAPTER X‑RULES FOR EXHIBITION BY MEANS OF TOURING
    CINEMATOGRAPH IN PLACES LICENSED TEMPORARILY
83. In places licenced Temporarily.‑.The rules in this Chapter shall apply to exhibition given by means of touring cinematograph in places licensed temporarily.
84. Use of cinematograph apparatus.‑No cinematograph apparatus shall be used unless it has been certified by the Electric Inspector to be fit without danger to the public for the purpose of giving exhibitions and such certificate shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issue.
85. Housing cinematograph apparatus.‑The cinematograph apparatus shall he housed in a metallic enclosure of substantial construction having the minimum size of 9 x 9 x 8 feet to allow the operator to move freely;
    Provided that if the cinematograph apparatus is certified by the Electric Inspector to be a touring cinematograph of the safety class, no fire proof enclosure need be made, but a clear space of six feet (hereinafter referred to as the 'space) shall be railed off all round the cinematograph apparatus.
86. Exhibition in tent, booth etc.‑In the case of exhibition given in a tent or booth or in any shelter or structure composed of, or covered with, combustible material or of movable character, the cinematograph apparatus shall be operated from outside such tent, booth, shelter or structure and shall be placed at a distance of at least six feet therefrom.
87. Entry into enclosure or reserve place.‑No person other than a qualified operator employed by the licensee and holding a certificate granted by the Electric Inspector or an apprentice duly authorised by the licensee under rule 107 shall be allowed to enter or be in the enclosure or the 'reserved space' while an exhibition is in progress.
88. No inflammable article in the enclosure.‑No inflammable article shall be taken into or allowed to remain in the enclosure or 'reserved space' and no smoking shall be permitted or a naked light used therein.
89. Drapery and unprotected material.‑No drapery and unprotected combustible material other than such material as may compose the floors shall be kept within six feet of the cinematograph apparatus.
90. Fire fighting appliance.‑(1) Adequate fire‑fighting appliances including buckets of sand, water, damp blankets and portable chemical fire extinguisher in number and of pattern, class and capacity approved by he District Magistrate and such other appliances as the District Magistrate may prescribe shall be kept in the licensed premises and they shall be so disposed as to be readily available for use in case of fire within the enclosure and shall be in the charge of a fully qualified person who is trained in fire extinguishing methods and is in possession of a certificate from a fire‑brigade station of a local authority or such other organization as may be specified by Government.
    (2) Fire buckets of approved design shall be provided in the place such number as the District Magistrate may direct and shall be kept at an times full of water.
91. Films in containers.‑All films not in use shall be kept in securely closed fire resisting receptacles or containers.
92. Exits. ‑‑Adequate means of exit shall be provided as prescribed by the District Magistrate and shall he se maintained as to afford the audience safe and speedy egress.
93. No use of tents, booths, ere. in certain circumstances.‑Without. prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in the immediately preceding rule, no tent, booth or similar structure shrill be used for the purpose of cinematograph exhibition if it is enclosed by a wall or walls which do not permit of adequate means of egress and which are erected within 30 feet of such tent, booth or similar structure.
94. Seating Capacity-----.(1) No part of the auditorium shall provide accommodation at a higher scale than 25 persons per 100 square feet exclusive of passages, nor shall the total number of seats in the auditorium exceed 400.
    (2) The seats in the auditorium shall be so arranged that there is a clear space of not less than one foot between the back of one seat and the front of the seat immediately behind.
    (3) The minimum distance between the cinematograph screen and the front role of seats shall not be less than 25 feet.
95. Seating arrangement.‑‑The seating in the auditorium shall be so arranged as not to interfere with free access to exits and passages and gangways leading to them and shall throughout the performance be kept clear of all obstacles.
96. Privy and urinal.‑Sufficient privy and urinal accommodation shall he provided separately for the use of males and females within a reasonable distance of the auditorium.
    CHAPTER XI‑OPERATORS AND APPRENTICES
97. Number of operators‑qualifications and knowledge.‑(1) In the case of premises annually licensed for cinematograph exhibition, the enclosure shall be in the charge of at least two qualified operators of not less than eighteen years of age each holding a certificate granted by the Electric Inspector to the effect that he is competent to handle and operate a cinematograph.
    (2) In the case of places temporarily licensed, if there is single projector, the enclosure shall be in the charge of one operator possessing tile qualifica tions prescribed in sub‑rule (1) and if there is a double projector, it shall be in the charge of two operators similarly qualified.
98. Operator s certificate---(1`) An operator shall not be granted a certificate under the rule unless he-----
    (a) possesses technical and working knowledge of cinematograph machines and other apparatus attached thereto ;
    (b) is thoroughly conversant with the rules relating to a cinematograph exhibition and precautions against fire ;
    (c) is acquainted with the most speedy and effective methods of dealing with fire ;
    (d) possesses an adequate knowledge of the elements o! electric power. direct and alternating current, voltage, amperage, etc. ; and
    (e) is proficient in the handling, winding, repairing and efficient cleaning of films.
    (2) Electric Inspector may, for reasons to be recorded in writing withdraw a certificate granted by him to an operator.
    (3) The following fees shall be charged for the grant and renewal o certificate to a cinema operator ;‑\_
    Rs;
    (a) For the grant of certificate; 25
    (b) For a duplicate copy of certificate 5
    (c) For the renewal of the certificate after every five yearn 10
    (d) For the grant of exchange certificate 10
99. Duties of the operator.‑An operator shall remain present in the .enclosure and shall devote his whole attention to the cinematograph during the wholetime, it is being operated.
100. Duties of operator before commencement of an exhibition.‑(1) Before the commencement of an exhibition, the operator shall satisfy himself that all cables, connections and resistances as also the fire‑extinguishing appliances in the enclosure are in proper working order.
     (2) The resistances. if not under constant observation, shall be inspected at least once during each performance and if a fault is detected, the current shall be immediately switched off and shall remain switched off until the fault is removed.
101. Speed of film.‑An operator shall not allow the film to travel through the machine at a speed greater than one hundred feet a minute in the case of 25 m.m. films and forty feet in the case of 16 m.m. films.
102. Apprentice.‑An apprentice duly authorised by the licensee may be allowed within the enclosure ; provided he is not less than sixteen years of age and is not permitted to operate the cinematograph except in the presence of duly qualified operator or operators, as the case may be, for ‑which an attendance register shall be maintained and intimation about the engagement or leaving of such apprentices shall invariably be sent to the Electric Inspector by the licensee.
103. No use of liquor.‑No person shall operate a cinematograph or be within the enclosure while under the influence of liquor or any other intoxicant.
104. Names of operators to be intimated.‑Every person who holds a licence under section 3 of the Act shall furnish the licensing authority and the Electric Inspector with the names of every operator employed by him and whenever any new operator is engaged by him he shall furnish his name .and full particulars to the licensing authority and the Electric Inspector before .he is allowed to commence work.
     CHAPTER XII‑GENERAL
105. Display of licences.‑The licensee shall lave the licence displayed in the licensed premises in such a manner that it is easily visible to the naked eye.
106. Suspension or cancellation of licence.‑(1) The District Magistrate may at any time, for reasons to be recorded in writing, revoke or suspend a licence granted by a licensing authority for any breach of these rules or the conditions of the licence ;
     Provided that the licensee may within thirty days of the communication of such decision to him, appeal against it to the Commissioner of the Division whose decision shall be final.
     (2) The District Magistrate may issue such directions or instructions to the licensee as may be considered necessary to prevent any obstruction, inconvenience, annoyance, risk, danger or damage to the residents or passers by in the vicinity of the licensed premises or for the maintenance of public safety and public order.
     (3) In the event of any outbreak or apprehended outbreak of an epidemic, the District Magistrate may, after consulting the District Health Authorities, direct‑----
     (a) the total closure of any licensed premises for specified number of days ;
     (b) a reduction in the secale of accommodation prescribed for licensed premises under role 17 or 99 as may be applicable ; and
     (c) the adoption of special measures for the disinfection of the licensed premises including spraying and fumigation.
     (4) The licensee shall be bound to comply forthwith with any directions issued under sub‑rules (2) and (3), and on his failure to do so, his licence shall be liable to revocation or suspension.
107. Hawking prohibited.‑‑The licensee shall not allow any person during a cinematograph exhibition or in the intervals of the exhibitions to shout in the auditorium for the purpose of hawking or offering for sale eatables, drinks or any other articles.
108. Timings of cinematograph exhibition.‑No cinematograph exhibition shall be held between the hours of 12‑30 a.m. and 3‑00 p .m. on any day in winter and between 1‑00 a.m. and 3‑30 p.m. in summer:
     Provided that‑---
     (t) nothing contained in this rule shall debar the holding of a cinema tograph exhibition between the hours of 11‑00 a.m. and 3.00 p.m. on Sundays, Gazetted holidays, the two days immediately following Eid and any other day declared to be a local holiday by the Provincial Government or by any other authority empowered in this behalf by the Provincial Government ; and
     (ii) the District Magistrate may permit the holding of special cinema shows outside these hours.
109. Licensed premises not to be used for any other purposes.‑‑The licensed premises shall not except with the previous permission of the District Magistrate, be used for purposes other than cinematograph exhibitions.
110. Spittoons.‑(I) Tie licensed premises shall be provided, to the satisfaction of the District Magistrate. with a sufficient number of spittoons at suitable places for the use of the public.
     (2) The spittoons shall contain a strong disinfectant and shall be emptied from time to time.
     (3) Notices for using such spittoons shall be displayed prominently at suitable places in tae licensed premises.
111. Cleanliness.‑The licensee shall at all times keep the licensed premises in a clean and sanitary condition.
112. Responsibilities of the licensee.‑‑‑(1) The licensee shall be responsible for complying with the of these rules and the conditions of a licence for maintaining the licensed premises at all times and in all respects in conformity with the standards prescribed by these rules, and for taking all necessary measures before any cinematograph exhibition is commenced, to ensure the safety of his employees and the public against fire and other accidents.`"`
     (2) The licensee or some reasonable person or persons nominated by him in writing for the purpose and whose name or names have been notified to the District Magistrate shall be in general charge of the licensed premises and the cinematograph apparatus during the whole time drat any exhibition is an progress therein.
113. Licensee liable for the acts of his employees----The licensee shall responsible for all acts and omissions of I+ managers, servants or against pertaining to the premises to which his licence relate.
114. Slot machines prohibited.‑No slot or amusement machine shall be operated on the licensed premises except with the written permission of the District Magistrate.
115. Parking of vehicles.‑No vehicle shall be parked or allowed to stand in such a way as to obstruct exit or impede the rapid dispersal of the persons accommodated in the cinema building in the event of fire or panic.
116. Budget Head.‑All fees realised under the Act and these Rules shall be credited to the Budget Head 'XXIII‑Other Taxes and Duties R‑‑ Receipts for Electricity Duties‑ B---‑Receipts payable under the Cinematograph Act and Rules."

