## 1228 Punjab Consolidation of Holdings Rules 1998
 
PUNJAB CONSOLIDATION OF HOLDINGS RULES, 1998
[Gazette of Punjab, Part III, 28th January, 1998]
No.85‑98/44‑C(H) PI, dated 22‑1‑1998.‑‑‑In exercise of the powers conferred on it by section 29 of the Punjab Consolidation of Holdings Ordinance, 1960 (Ordinance No.VI of 1960), the Board of Revenue, Punjab is pleased to make the following rules in supersession of the Punjab Consolidation of Holdings Rules, 1960:‑‑
PART I PRELIMINARY
I. Short title and commencement.‑‑(1) These Rules may be called the Punjab Consolidation of Holdings Rules, 1998.
(2) They shall come into force at once
2 Definitions. ‑‑‑In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires the following expressions shall have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, that is to say:‑‑
(a) "Applicant' means the landowners who have applied for the consolidation of their holdings under subsection (2) of section 3;
(c) "Form" means a form prescribed under these rules;
(d) "Musawada Scheme" means a framework of objectives, guidelines and general principles to be followed during consolidation proceedings in an estate or its sub‑division;
(e) "Ordinance" means the Punjab Consolidation of Holdings Ordinance, 1960;
(f). (i) Parcha Milkiat and Qabza means a document showing pre -consolidation ownership and possession of land holding of a landowner;
(ii) Parcha Tajweez Taqseem means a document showing land proposed to be distributed to a landowner;
(iii) Parcha Tasdeeq Taqseem means a document showing distribution of land to a landowner, approved by the Consolidation Officer;
(iv) Parcha Hatmi Taqseem means a document showing land confirmed in the WANDA of a landowner;
(g) "Section" means the respective section of the Ordinance.
PART II APPLICATION FOR CONSOLIDATION 3. Copy of application to be sent to Collector.‑‑A copy of every application for consolidation received by the Consolidation Officer shall be sent by him to the Collector for information. . 4. Minimum area required for making an application.‑‑(I) No application for consolidation of holdings under subsection (2) of section 3 shall be considered unless the landowners making the application hold together not less than two squares or two rectangles or fifty acres of cultivable land, whichever is more.
(2) An application for consolidation shall be in the prescribed form. 5. Examination of the application.‑‑On the receipt of an application for consolidation, the Consolidation Officer shall examine the application and see whether it complies with the provisions of the Ordinance and of these rules, and, if it is not in order, or if for any other reason, the Consolidation Officer considers that the application should not be entertained, he shall recommend to the Collector that application may be rejected:
Provided that no such recommendation shall be made unless the applicants have been given an opportunity of being heard and where necessary to amend their application. 6. Admission of Application.‑‑If the Consolidation Officer admits the application or the Collector, after considering the recommendation of the Consolidation Officer under section 7, allows the application, the Consolidation Officer shall record a formal order of its admission. 7. Publicity of application/motion.‑‑(1) If the application is admitted, or a motion under subsection (1) of section 3 is received, the Consolidation Officer shall cause a proclamation to be made in the estate or sub‑division of the estate in which the holdings referred to in the application or motion are situate informing all landowners of the receipt of the application or motion and the date, time and place when and where he will meet them and examine the application or motion. Such place shall be in the estate concerned or in proximity thereof. The proclamation shall be in the prescribed Form and shall be made as prescribed under Rule 11 and by beat of drum or other customary mode prevalent in the tract.
(2) The date fixed for the examination of ,the application shall not be less than fifteen days from the date on which the proclamation is made. 8. Enquiry from landowners and other persons present.‑‑(1) On the date so fixed, the Consolidation Officer shall, where an application or motion for consolidation has been made under the provisions of section 3, enquire from the landowners as are present and whose holdings are situate in the estate or sub division to which the application or motion relates, whether they agree to it or they have any objection. He may make such other enquiry from the landowners present as he thinks fit.
(2) Any objection or representation made at this stage of the enquiry shall be recorded by the Consolidation Officer.
(3) The Consolidation Officer may, for the purpose of facilitating an agreement being reduced to writing, or for any other sufficient reason, postpone the proceedings.
(4) The Consolidation Officer shall ascertain the consent of landowners as laid down in section 4 in the manner prescribed in Rule 12.
(5) Besides .prescribed consent of the landowners, the following objectives/criteria for consolidation shall .also be kept in view for allowing consolidation to proceed:‑‑
(a) Allocation reservation of land for common community purposes like school, playground, graveyard, paths, etc.;
(b) Division of Shamlat;
(c) Reduction of number of plots;
(d) Partition of Joint Khatas;
(e) Termination of illicit and unauthorized possession on private and Shamlat land in excess of entitlement;
(f) any other point important in the specific circumstances of the Revenue Estate considered by the Consolidation Officer or indicated by the Collector. ‑ 9. Conclusion of the Enquiry.‑‑(1) At the conclusion of the enquiry, the Consolidation Officer shall record his finding and recommendations and send his report to the Collector.
(2) On receipt of the report of the Consolidation Officer, the Collector shall cause the publicity of its gist amongst the landowners by notifying it at a conspicuous place and by proclamation as prescribed in Rule 11. He shall give 15 days' notice inviting objections from the landowners with a copy to the Collector of the Sub‑Division. He alongwith the Consolidation Officer and the Tehsildar or Revenue Officer Halqa shall hold a public meeting in the Estate or its Sub‑Division as the case may be. He shall apprise the landowners of the report of the Consolidation Officer and the objections received so far. He shall hear their objections presented in the meeting and make a decision thereon. If an adjournment is necessary, the next date and place of meeting may be announced on the spot. After concluding the hearing, he may pass an order of allowing the consolidation to proceed or otherwise. Copy of the order shall be sent to the Collector of the Sub‑Division and the Commissioner.
(3) The landowners may file appeal/objection before the Commissioner within a period of 30 days. He shall dispose of the same after hearing within a period of 30 days and pass an order as he deems fit.
(4) The Consolidation Officer shall then cause proclamation of the order as per Rule 11.
(5) No objection, appeal or revision shall be entertained on the point of admission after the order of the Commissioner.
10 Second Consolidation.‑‑The Board of Revenue may allow the second consolidation of an estate already consolidated under the Consolidation of Holdings Ordinance, 1960 if:‑‑
(1) 15 years, have elapsed after the date of consignment of its Misal Haqiat as verified by the Collector of Sub‑Division:
Provided in case of new physical barriers like new Railway Line, Motorway, drainage having been constructed, second consolidation can be allowed at an early date.
(2) Consent of landowners is obtained as in case of first consolidation.
(3) The objectives/principles, and guidelines of consolidation are kept in view
PART III GENERAL PROCEDURE 11. Proclamation.‑‑Whenever an application, proposal, order, notice for the meeting, etc. is to be proclaimed under the Punjab Consolidation of Holdings Ordinance, 1960 and these Rules, the proclamation shall be made as under: ‑‑
(1) The proclamation in the prescribed Form shall be got signed by Chaukidar, Lambardar, Members of the local council, Headmaster of the local school, Imam Masjid and Members of Advisory Committee of the Estate as far as possible. One signed copy shall be displayed at a conspicuous place like office of the Union Council, Mosque or school in the estate. One copy shall be attached with the entry in the Roznamcha Waqiati and another copy sent to the Consolidation Officer for record. If it is provided in a case of proceedings to send a copy of the same to some other officer, it shall be done in that case.
(2) The date of meeting, hearing or any action to be taken by an Officer for which proclamation is made, shall be mentioned therein. The notice shall not be less than 7 days in any case provided a longer or shorter period is not prescribed for an action. 12. Procedure for obtaining consent of landowners.‑‑The consent of landowners shall be obtained at various stages of consolidation in the manner prescribed as under:‑‑
(1) Starting Consolidation Operations.‑‑(a) For obtaining consent for taking over the estate for consolidation, a list of landowners with number of Khata, share in the holding, area of the respective share separately shown as cultivable and uncultivable shall be prepared in the prescribed register.
(b) The consent of the landowner shall be recorded on that register indicating his name, parentage and identity card number. Signature as well as thumb‑impression of the landowner, guardian of the minor or insane person and the authorized agent of the absentee or otherwise incapacitated landowner shall be obtained on the register.
(2) Framing of the Advisory Committee.‑‑-after giving at least 7 days' clear notice and proclamation as per Rule 11, the consent shall be obtained from 60% of the landowners present in the open assembly. If the landowners seek adjournment, the next date will be fixed in the same meeting. Proceedings will be recorded in writing.
(3) Preparation of Musawada Scheme.‑‑‑The consent of 75% of the members of the Advisory Committee and the majority of the landowners present in the assembly held after 15 days clear notice shall be mandatory. The consent of landowners shall be obtained in the open assembly as prescribed in (1) (b) above. The members of the Advisory Committee shall sign/thumb‑mark proceedings as a token of their consent.
For (1), (2) and (3) above, consent of one right holder in a joint Khata shall be deemed to be consent of all the right holders in that Khata.
(4) Proposal of distribution of land to a landowner. ‑‑‑Each scheme number (Wanda) shall be verified by at least 2 members of the Advisory Committee by affixing their thumb‑mark or signatures at the time of proposal as well as approval and any amendment prior to confirmation of the Consolidation Scheme:
(a) The consent of each landowner shall be mandatory for the acceptance of allocation/distribution of land (Wanda) to him.
(b) The consent of one or more landowners in a joint Khata shall be sufficient for the acceptance of Wanda by all the shareholders, provided that if a landowner files an objection before the confirmation of the Scheme, his consent shall be mandatory.
(c) In case, a landowner does not accept‑the distribution of land or refuses to sign/thumb‑mark the Wanda, a note stating his objection and decision taken thereon shall be recorded by the Consolidation Officer.
(d) The consent shall be obtained on the Register Scheme as per (1) (b).
(e) If any change or ‑adjustment in Wanda is made before confirmation of the scheme, acceptance to that effect or otherwise shall be recorded in the above manner. 13. Authorized agent.‑‑The agent for pursuing the consolidation proceedings will be authorized by a landowner/right holder on a Stamp Paper of Rs.10 duly attested by a Magistrate 1st Class or member of Local Council, Provincial/National Assembly or Senate, a gazetted officer or an employer in a private firm where he is employed. Two witnesses shall verify it whose identity card numbers shall be entered with their thumb‑impression and signatures. 14. Receipt or delivery of documents.‑‑(1) An entry shall be made in the register with number and date giving the particulars of the document/paper received or delivered from/to a landowner. Number of his Identity Card shall be entered and signatures as well as thumb‑impression shall be obtained in token of receipt/proof of delivery. A member of Advisory Committee or two landowners of the estate may attest it by affixing their signatures or thumb‑impression. it shall be obligatory when the Parcha "Milkiat and Qabza", Parcha Tajweez Taqseem, "Parcha Tasdeeq Taqseem", "Parcha Hatmi Taqseem" or any other document pertaining to consolidation is delivered to a landowner.
(2) An agreed scheme or agreement of exchange or change in possession of land shall be on a stamp paper of Rs.10 attested as per rule 13 and shall be entered in a register against a receipt signed by the Patwari and Qanungo. 15. Non‑availability of Identity Card.‑If a landowner does not possess Identity Card, number of which is required to be recorded under Rules 12 and 13 or any other purpose of consolidation proceedings, two landowners of the estate shall verify his identity and their Identity Card numbers shall be recorded in the document/register. 16. Boundary line of Revenue Estate.‑‑(a) Boundary line of the Revenue Estate in the last settlement shall be taken as final for the consolidation operation.
(b) Boundary line of two Revenue Estates simultaneously under consolidation can be readjusted with the written permission of the Commissioner or Board of Revenue. If permission is riot granted, the boundary line of the last settlement shall be treated as final.
(c) Any excess or shortage of land on fresh measurement shall be distributed on the landowners proportionate to their holdings. 17. Killa Bandi.‑‑Consolidation shall be made on the basis of Killa Bandi. If the physical features of an estate do not permit, the condition may be waived by the Commissioner or Board of Revenue for specific reasons.
18.. Partition of joint holdings.‑‑(i) Any landowner/right holder in a joint holding shall be entitled to demand partition of the holding and separate allocation of his share regardless of the consent of other right holders in the holding.
(ii) The right holders who want to keep their Khata joint shall be allowed accordingly.
(iii) The share of widows and minor orphans in a joint Khata shall be partitioned without exception.
PART IV ADVISORY COMMITTEE 19. Appointment.‑(1) When an order under rule 9 has been made directing that consolidation should proceed in an estate or its sub‑division the Consolidation Officer shall constitute an Advisory Committee consisting of not less than five and not more than nine persons as may be determined by him, to assist him in the preparation of a scheme for consolidation:‑‑‑
Provided that:‑‑--
(a) 75% of the Members shall be from the owners of 12‑1/2 acres or less cultivable land;
(b) The Collector may vary the number of members or percentage for reasons to be recorded.
(2) The Members of the Advisory. Committee shall be chosen by the Consolidation Officer with the consent of the landowners as per Rule 12, provided that, if such landowners fail to appoint the members of the Advisory Committee or any' number of them, the Consolidation Officer shall nominate such members or such remaining number of members from among persons of integrity and influence who have evinced keen interest in the work of consolidation.
(3) When the members of the Advisory Committee have been chosen or nominated, as the case may be, the Consolidation Officer shall record the proceedings of formation of the Committee and shall explain to the members of the Advisory Committee the nature of their functions.
(4) The proceedings shall be forwarded to the Collector who shall invite objections of the landowners within 15 days. After hearing the objections, he shall approve or amend it within 15 days and pass orders regarding formation of the Advisory Committee with a copy to the Consolidation Officer and the Commissioner. 20. President.‑‑The Consolidation Officer shall be the President of the Advisory Committee. 21. Removal.‑‑(1) A Member of the Advisory Committee may resign at any time by making a written request to the Consolidation Officer.
(2) The (consolidation Officer may recommend to the Collector, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the removal of any Member of the Advisory Committee if he refuses to act, becomes incapable of acting or taking part in the examination or preparation of the scheme of consolidation or if his continuance on the Advisory Committee is deemed to be undesirable.
(3) The Collector may pass appropriate order after giving opportunity of hearing to the concerned member. 22. Filling the Vacancy.‑‑‑Any vacancy caused by the removal of a Member of the Advisory Committee or otherwise shall be filled in the manner provided in Rule 19. 23. Quorum.‑‑Where anything is required under these Rules to be done by or in the presence of the Advisory Committee it shall be a sufficient compliance if such thing is done by or in the presence of the majority of the members of the Advisory Committee:
Provided that. all the Members are informed 3 days before the meeting with the items of the agenda.
PART V MUSAWADA SCHEME 24. Preparation of Musawada Scheme.‑‑(1) The Consolidation Officer shall prepare the Musawada Scheme of the estate in consultation with the Advisory Committee and landowners keeping in view the objectives of the consolidation as per rule 8 (5) and circumstances of the estate.
(2) All the other major policy decisions under which consolidation proceedings will be undertaken shall be made a part of the Musawada Scheme. 25. Classification of land.‑‑(1) The classification of land will be an integral part of the Musawada Scheme. It shall be done for each Khasra number or its part in an objective manner by deciding the objections, if any on the spot.
(2) Comparative value of each category of land shall be determined in consultation with the Advisory Committee. 26. Procedure for framing Musawada Scheme.‑‑(1) The Consolidation Officer, assisted by the Advisory Committee, shall satisfy himself that the land‑owners understand the salient features of the scheme.
(2) The general procedure for proclamation regarding Musawada Scheme in Rule 11 and inviting objections and disposal of the same under Rule 8 shall be followed by the Consolidation Officer for framing the scheme.
(3) After preparation of the Musawada Scheme, the Consolidation Officer may record his observations regarding achievement of the objectives of consolidation and give his recommendations for amendments in the scheme and forward the same to the Collector. 27. Finalization of Musawada Scheme.‑‑(1) The Collector shall finalize the Musawada Scheme with or without amendments according to the procedure prescribed in Rule 9. The presence of the Tehsildar or Revenue Officer Halqa shall, however, not be necessary.
(2) The Collector shall thereafter send the final Musawada Scheme to the Consolidation Officer with a copy to the Commissioner.
(3) In case any objection is filed against the order of Collector, the Commissioner shall decide the objections within 30 days and return the Musawada Scheme to the Collector with his directions, if any. The Collector shall send it to the Consolidation Officer.
(4) The Musawada Scheme shall then be notified to the landowners by the Consolidation Officer in the prescribed manner.
(5) The Musawada Scheme shall be made available for the information of the landowners. Any landowner may get its copy on payment of prescribed fee. ,
(6) No application, petition or appeal shall be entertained regarding Musawada Scheme including classification of land after the scheme is notified.
PART VI PRELIMINARY RECORD 28. Register Milkiat and Qabza (ownership and possession).‑‑(1) The preliminary record regarding land holdings giving number of Khata/Khatauni, Khasra/sub‑Khasra, category of land, ownership and possession shall be prepared on the basis of latest Register Haqdaran Zamin and other periodical record i.e., Register Dakhil Kharij and Register Girdawari.
(2) On the basis of the preliminary record of the estate, Register Milkiat and Qabza showing individual ownership and possession of each landowner shall be prepared by the Consolidation Officer in the prescribed Form. It shall be notified by him in the estate. A copy of this Register shall be sent to the Collector. 29. Parcha Milkiat and Qabza.‑‑(1) Parcha Malkiat and Qabza indicating land owned by a landowner with the position of possession on the basis of Register Milkiat and Qabza shall be issued by the Consolidation Officer to all the landowners in the estate giving details as per Rule 28(1).
(2) Any landowner may file objection before the Consolidation Officer within 30 days from the date of receipt of PARCHA MILKIAT AND QABZA or receipt of Register Malkiat and Qabza in the office of the Collector, whichever is later.
(3).The Consolidation Officer shall hear the concerned landowner and decide the objection within 30 days.
(4) Any landowner may file an appeal before the Collector against the decision of the Consolidation Officer within 30 days from the date of decision. The Collector shall take a decision within 30 days and intimate the same to the Consolidation Officer. 30. Finalization of Register Milkiat and Qabza.‑‑The Consolidation Officer shall incorporate the decisions of the Collector and prepare final draft of Register "Milkiat and Qabza" and send its copy to the Collector. 31. Intiqal‑e‑Ishtrak (Mutation of Joint Ownership).‑‑Prior to distribution of land to the right holders Intiqal‑e‑Ishtrak shall be attested by the Consolidation Officer to render entire land of the estate or its sub‑division as a joint holding of all the right holders.
PART VII CONSOLIDATION SCHEME 32. Examination of an agreed Scheme.‑‑(1) Two or more landowners in a revenue estate or its 'sub‑division may submit to the Consolidation Officer an agreed scheme of consolidation regarding their holdings in writing with their identity card numbers, signatures and thumb‑impressions. A member of the Advisory Committee or two other landowners of the estate shall verify it giving their identity card numbers and affixing their signatures and thumb‑impressions. They shall not be shareholders in the land in question.
(2) In examining a scheme mutually agreed to by the applicants, the Consolidation Officer, assisted by the Advisory Committee shall satisfy himself that;‑‑
(a) The agreed scheme meets the conditions, principles and criteria laid down in the Musawada Scheme;
(b) All the applicants understand that agreement is genuine and has not been obtained by fraud misrepresentation or undue influence.
(3) If the Consolidation Officer decides to modify any scheme mutually agreed to by the applicants he shall proceed in the manner prescribed for the preparation of the consolidation scheme and shall provide opportunity of being heard before taking a decision. 33. Preparation of the Consolidation Scheme.‑‑(1) On the basis of Register Milkiat and Qabza the Consolidation Scheme shall be prepared in the prescribed form. The Patwari shall record the entitlement of each right holder in the relevant columns.
(2) The Qanungo shall propose land to be distributed to one or more landowners according to his\their entitlement (Wanda) in the prescribed columns. At least 2 Members of the Advisory Committee shall attest the proposal. 34. Parcha Tajveez Taqseem.‑‑The Qanungo shall prepare Parcha Tajveez . Taqseem in the prescribed form on the basis of his proposal and deliver the same to each land owner against a receipt in the prescribed register. 35. Approval of Distribution/Allocation of Holdings (Wanda).‑‑(1) After at least 7 days from the delivery of Parcha Tajveez Taqseem, the Consolidation Officer shall, in consultation with the concerned landowners and the Advisory Committee approve the Wanda through a order in the relevant column. At least 2 members of the Advisory Committee shall attest the Wanda and the landowners shall record his\their consent as per Rule 12.
(2) If any of the right holder does not agree to the distribution of land made to him the Consolidation Officer shall record a note to that effect with his observations. 36. Parcha Tasdeeq Taqseem.‑‑(1) The Consolidation Officer shall get prepared Parcha Tasdeeq Taqseem in respect of each Wanda and ensure its delivery to the concerned right holder recording the delivery in the prescribed register. '
(2) Before the confirmation of the consolidation scheme of an estate, if some change/adjustment in Wanda is necessitated, the Consolidation Officer shall do so after notice to the right holders likely to be affected thereby. The consent or otherwise shall be recorded.
(3) On each amendment, amended Parcha Tasdeeq Taqseem shall be delivered to the landowner against receipt in the register. 37. Finalization of the Consolidation Scheme.‑‑(1) In case all the landowners of the estate record their consent on the register scheme, the Consolidation Officer shall finalize the scheme and forward to the Collector for appraisal.
(2) In case some of the landowners of an estate do not consent to distribution of land made to them by the Consolidation Officer, he shall finalize the scheme regarding the Wandas of the consenting landowners and make his observations on the Wandas of the remaining landowners and forward the same to the Collector for confirmation. 38. Verification by Collector.‑‑(1) On receipt of the consolidation scheme, the Collector shall notify the scheme to the landowners by proclamation and after at least 15 days' notice, shall hear the landowners in the estate in an open assembly. He shall satisfy himself that:‑‑
(a) The scheme has been prepared in consonance . with the objectives/criteria laid down in the consolidation law, rules and the Musawada Scheme.
(b) The consent of the landowners has been recorded correctly; and
(c) Parcha Tasdeeq Taqseem has been distributed to all the landowners.
(2) After hearing the landowners and inspecting the record if the Collector feels that the scheme does not fulfil the conditions enumerated in (1) above, he shall pass appropriate orders and send the scheme back to the Consolidation officer for making up the deficiencies.
(3) On receipt of the scheme, the Consolidation Officer shall remove the deficiencies and make efforts to obtain the consent of the remaining land owners. If all the landowners by then consent to the scheme, it shall be referred to the Collector for appraisal and in case some of the landowners do not consent, the scheme shall be referred to the Collector for confirmation.
(4) The Collector shall again take action in case the scheme is sent to him for appraisal as per (1) above.
(5) If the Collector is satisfied with‑ the scheme, he shall record it and send it to the Consolidation Officer otherwise he may proceed to take action under section 10(4) confirming the scheme himself making the necessary amendments if he deems fit. 39. Confirmation of the Consolidation Scheme.‑(1) On the receipt of the scheme under Rule 38(5), the Consolidation Officer shall record the confirmation order under section 10(3) of the Ordinance.
(2) The scheme referred to the Collector for confirmation, shall be notified to the landowners who shall be given 15 days' notice for holding open assembly in the estate. After hearing the landowners and making amendments as he deems fit, the Collector may confirm the scheme under section 10(4) of the Ordinance and send it to the Consolidation Officer for further action.
(3) After confirmation of the scheme by the Collector, the Consolidation Officer shall proceed in the manner provided in section 15. 40. Amendments in the Consolidation Scheme after confirmation.‑ After the orders of confirmation of the scheme under section 10(3), no amendment in the consolidation scheme shall be made by the Consolidation Officer and if the scheme has been confirmed under section 10(4), by, the Collector. 41. Parcha Hatmi Taqseem.‑‑(1) Where amendments have been made by the Consolidation Officer or the Collector after the issue of original or amended Parcha Tasdeeq Taqsem, Parcha Hatmi Taqseem in the prescribed form shall be prepared and delivered to the landowner against a receipt in the prescribed register.
(2) If no amendment has been made, the Consolidation Officer shall record confirmation of the Wanda on the Parcha Tasdeeq Taqseem already issued to him. 42. Copy of the Confirmed Scheme.‑‑(1) After confirmation of the Consolidation Scheme and action as per rule 41, the Consolidation Officer shall send it to the field staff. He shall retain one copy with himself and send one copy each to the Collector Consolidation and the Collector of the Sub‑Division. 43. Inteqal‑e‑Taqseem.‑‑After confirmation of the consolidation scheme, the Consolidation Officer shall attest Intiqal‑e‑Taqseem creating individual rights of the landowners according to the fresh distribution of land. 44. Demarcation of Boundaries.‑‑The Consolidation Officer shall get the boundaries of the holdings demarcated.
PART VIII MISAL HAQIAT 45. Preparation of record of rights (Misal Haqiat).‑After confirmation of the Consolidation Scheme, papers/documents shall be prepared as prescribed bY the Board. 46. Consignment of Record of Rights‑‑Return of Estate to Revenue Department.‑‑(1) The record of rights (Misal Haqiat) alongwith whole the record has to be prepared and consigned to record after Girdawari of 2 Harvests after confirmation of consolidation scheme.
(2) If the record of rights is not completed and consigned within 2 years from the date of confirmation, the Collector may after giving reasons, extend the date by a year under intimation to the Commissioner and District Collector.
(3) If the same is not completed even up to that date, the Commissioner may extend the date by another year giving cogent reasons under intimation to the District Collector and the Board of Revenue. .
(4) If the record of rights is not consigned to the record even after 4 years after the confirmation of the consolidation scheme, the Collector' must transfer the record as it is, alongwith the staff to the District Collector or may refer the case to the Board of Revenue through the Commissioner within 2 months for further extension of time limit.
(5) On such reference, the Board may extend the period for preparation of record or reject the proposal and order return of record with staff to Revenue side besides taking any other action as it deems fit. .
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the above provisions or any order/action under (3) to (5) above, the Board may pass any order regarding time limit for preparation of record at any time 2 years after the confirmation of Consolidation Scheme.
PART IX MISCELLANEOUS 47. Minors.‑‑Where a landowner whose holding is likely to be affected by a scheme of consolidation is a minor and a natural guardian is not coming forward, the Consolidation Officer may after making such enquiries as may be necessary, by order in writing, appoint a suitable person, whose interest is not adverse to that of the minor, as guardian‑ad‑litem of such minor. 48. Cost of consolidation proceedings.‑‑The cost of consolidation proceedings shall be assessed by the Collector for the cultivable and other categories of land at the rate to be approved by the Commissioner provided that the total amount so assessed shall not exceed the actual cost incurred by the Government and Consolidation Department on the consolidation proceedings of the estate or its sub‑division. 49. Transfer of property during consolidation proceedings.‑‑1f any document relating to the transfer of land or any interest in or over land in respect of which consolidation proceedings under the Ordinance are pending is presented for registration under the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908, the Registrar or the Sub‑Registrar concerned shall refuse its registration unless the document is accompanied by a written permission from the Consolidation Officer allowing the said transfer. 50. Prevention/removal of encroachment.‑‑Au order passed by a Revenue Officer under the provisions of section 19 forbidding the repetition of any encroachment on any way or path, shall be published by proclamation under Rule 11 and by beat of drum or other customary mode prevalent in the tract and by affixing a copy thereof at a conspicuous place in or near the land to which it relates. 51. Remand of cases.‑In an appeal under section 11 or a revision under section 13 against the final order of a Revenue Officer in a case:
(a) No Appellate or Revisional Authority other than the Board of Revenue shall have the power to remand the case:
(b) Subject to clause (a), the Appellate or the Revisional Authority, as the case may be shall finally determine the case, notwithstanding that the impugned order proceeds upon a ground other than that on which the Appellate or Revisional Authority proceeds;
(c) Where the impugned order has omitted to decide a question of fact which appears to the Appellate or the Revisional Authority, as the case may be to be essential for the correct decision of the case, the said authority may direct the Revenue Officer who passed the impugned order to record a finding thereon, after recording additional evidence, if necessary. The Appellate or the Revisional Authority, as the case may be shall after considering any objection which may be preferred against such findings by a party within a time to be fixed by the said Authority, proceed to decide the case;
(d) The Appellate or the Revisional Authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, allow additional evidence to be produced and take such evidence either itself or direct the Revenue Officer who passed the impugned order or any other subordinate Revenue Officer to take such evidence and send the same to it.
PART X ANNULMENT OF CONSOLIDATION SCHEME 52. Collection of Data.‑‑(1) Subject to the provisions and procedure laid down under section 13 of the Ordinance, if the Board of Revenue or the Commissioner on their own motion or on a petition by an aggrieved person, is seized of the issue of annulment of the entire consolidation scheme of the estate, or its sub‑division, action shall be taken as under:‑
(a) Total number of Khatas, landowners and cultivable land of the estate shall be noted.
(b) All the pending litigation with the Collector, Commissioner and the Board of Revenue shall be tabulated.
(c) The number of Khatas/Scheme numbers, landowners, area of cultivable land challenged/involved in appeals, revision petitions and applications shall be tabulated and compared to the total numbers as in (a) above.
(d) The issues and points of dispute omissions and irregularities shall be listed giving specific fact
(e) The issues will be checked/got checked from the record and if necessary on the ground. The aggrieved persons shall be heard. 53. Remedial action.‑‑(1) After the above exercise, an order giving reasons shall be passed directing to adopt one of the following courses of action:
(a) The pending appeals and revision petitions be decided by the relevant Courts/officers on merits; or
(b) The issues pertaining to the affected landowners and disputed land be settled through an order on the package of suo motu proposals; or
(c) If the irregularities and omissions cannot be rectified by following the courses at (a) and
(b) above, the entire scheme may be annulled and estate or its sub‑division reconsolidated.
(2) The order of annulment under rule (1) (c) shall contain:‑‑
(a) detail of specific omissions and irregularities avoiding reference in general terms as far as possible;
(b) detailed directions/guidelines regarding reconsolidation, to avoid the repetition of defects and omissions in the last scheme;
(c) directions to exclude, if necessary, certain area and landowners, not involved in litigation from the scope of reconsolidation giving reasons for the same;
(d) findings fixing the responsibility on the officials for the irregularities and omissions necessitating .the annulment of the scheme. It shall form part of the order and case shall simultaneously be referred to the relevant authority for appropriate action. 54. Forms.‑‑The Forms mentioned in the above Rules shall be prescribed by the Board from time to time.

