## 1899 Punjab Police Welfare Fund 2006
 
PUNJAB POLICE WELFARE FUND, 2006
(Amendment in Regulations of the Punjab Police Welfare Fund-2006)
[Gazette of Punjab, Part III,
Memorandum
No.11220-11345/Acctt:, dated 26-11-2011.---Please refer to the subject cited above. 2. The competent authority has allowed following amendments in "The Punjab Police Welfare Fund Regulations, 2006".---
Present Provisions
Amended 5. DEFINITIONS Unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context: a) "Member" means i) Who has served or is serving in the Police Force of the Province of the Punjab as Police Officer in junior or senior ranks. 5. DEFINITIONS Unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context: a) "Member" means i) Who has served or is serving in the Police Force of the Province of the Punjab as Police Officer in junior or senior ranks and continuously contributed or contributing towards Punjab Police Welfare Fund.
ii) Who has served or is serving on the ministerial cadre in any of the offices of the Punjab Police.
ii) Who has served or is serving on the ministerial cadre in any of the offices of the Punjab Police and continuously contributed or contributing towards Punjab Police Welfare Fund.
iii) Who while retaining permanent lien of service in the Punjab Police is or has been on deputation to any other department.
iii) Who while retaining permanent lien of service in the Punjab Police is or has been on deputation to any other department but is continuously contributing towards Punjab Police Welfare Fund. 7. COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT (i) A Committee of Management consisting of the following shall deal with all the matters relating to the administration of the Punjab Police Welfare Fund: - 1 to 3 xxx xx 4) Deputy Inspector General of Police, Welfare & Finance, Punjab, Lahore. 4) AIG/Development, PHQ, Lahore. 5) Deputy Inspector General of Police, HQrs., Punjab, Lahore. 5) AIG/Finance, PHQ, Lahore. 6) AIG/Finance, C.P.O., Lahore. 6) AIG/Logistics, PHQ, Lahore. 8. CONTRIBUTIONS Contributions to "The Punjab Police Welfare Funds" shall be recovered each month of the rate of 2% of pay drawn by each member. 8. CONTRIBUTIONS Contributions to "The Punjab Police Welfare Fund" shall be recovered each month of the rate of 3% of pay drawn by each member. 9. MANNERS OF COLLECTION OF CONTRIBUTION AND MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS. v. --- 9. MANNERS OF COLLECTION OF CONTRIBUTION AND MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS. v. The Addl: Inspector General of Police, Finance & Welfare, Punjab shall be competent to sanction up-to Rs.300,000/- (Rupees three hundred thousand only) in a case where benefits are to be given to an individual beneficiary and up-to Rs.500,000/- (Rupees five hundred thousand only) in a case where benefits are to be granted to a group of beneficiaries. Provided that where the involved amount in a single beneficiary case exceeds the limit of Rs.300,000/- (Rupees three hundred thousand only) or where the involved amount in a group of beneficiaries case exceeds the limit of Rs.500,000/- (Rupees five hundred thousand only), the case carrying the due recommendations of the Addl: Inspector General of Police, Finance & Welfare, Punjab shall be forwarded to the Inspector General of Police, Punjab for sanction and final orders. 12. PROVISION OF AMENITIES (iii) Reimburse medical expenses incurred by the Police Officials of and below the rank of Inspector of Police, Ministerial Staff for the treatment of members and their dependents in deserving cases which cannot be claimed from the Government Revenues. 12. PROVISION OF AMENITIES (iii) Reimburse medical expenses incurred by the Police Officers/Officials who are or remained members of Punjab Police Welfare Fund for the treatment of members and their dependents in deserving cases which cannot be claimed from the Government Revenues.
(vi) Grant loans to the deserving officials who cannot be granted such loans from Government exchequer.
(vi) Grant of one month's salary on retirement to each officer/official (last pay drawn-total emoluments) who are members of Punjab Police Welfare Fund. 13. PROCEDURE The following procedure shall be adopted before the cases for the grant of monetary assistance, loans, scholarships, reimbursement of medical charges etc. are forwarded to the Addl: Inspector General of Police, Finance & Welfare, Punjab, Lahore. 13. PROCEDURE The following procedure shall be adopted before the cases for the grant of monetary assistance, scholarships, reimbursement of medical charges, one month's salary on retirement etc. are forwarded to the Addl: Inspector General of Police, Finance & Welfare, Punjab, Lahore.
(a) Loans
(a) One month's salary on retirement
(i) An application for the grant of loan shall be submitted in form P,P.W.F (1) (Appendix A) which shall be supported by an Agreement in form P.P.W.F (2) (Appendix B). The prescribed rates for such loans shall be as under: - 1 to 7 xx xx xx
(i) One month's salary (last pay drawn-total emoluments) on retirement on superannuation, voluntarily or incapacitated would be eligible.
(ii) All such applications shall be forwarded to the Addl: Inspector General of Police, Finance & Welfare, Punjab Lahore through the District/Unit Welfare Committee who shall first scrutinize the pecuniary circumstances of the applicant to justify the grant of loan applied for. The following factors shall be kept in view before recommending the grant of loans: 1 to 3 xx xx xx
(b) SCHOLARSHIP (i) The deserving children of the Police officers and men including ministerial Staff, who have passed their Matriculation Examination with favourable results and have joined the recognized College shall be eligible for the grant of Scholarship. The amount payable in this respect will be on the following scales:--- (A) to (F) xxx xxxx xxxx
(b) SCHOLARSHIPS (i) The deserving children of the Police officers/officials including ministerial Staff who are members of Punjab Police Welfare Fund and have passed their Matriculation Exami-nation with favourable results and have joined the recognized College/University shall be eligible for the grant of Scholarships on annual basis. The other terms and conditions would be circulated as and when applications will be invited on each year.
(ii) All applications for the, grant of scholarships shall be submitted in form P.P.W.F 3 (Appendix C) through the District/Unit Welfare Committee. The Committee while examining an application shall ensure that the individual for whom scholarship has been applied for has already joined the College and that he is really suitable candidate for the grant of scholarship. The applications shall then be forwarded to the Addl: Inspector General of Police, Finance & Welfare, Punjab, Lahore, so as to reach him
(ii) All applications for the grant of scholarships shall be submitted in form P.P.W.F. 3 (Appendix C) through the District/Unit Welfare Committee.
not later than the 15th October each year. The applications received after the prescribed date shall not be entertained.
(D) STIPEND/MAINTE-NANCE ALLOWANCE i) Pension, the widow/invalid/handicapped official is getting.
(D) STIPPEND/MAINTE-NANCE ALLOWANCE i) That the death occurred while Police officer/official was in service or invalid/handi-capped officer/official. The Maintenance Allowance would not be sanctioned for ex employees of the Police Department who super-annuated, retired voluntarily or have otherwise left or were dismissed from the Department.
vi) The amount of stipend/Maintenance will be up-to Rs. 2,000/- P.M. The same will admissible till the eldest son of the widow/invalid/ handicapped attains the age of 25 years or gets an employment, which is earlier.
vi) The amount of stipend/ Maintenance will be up-to Rs.4,000/- per month or as revised by the competent authority. The same will be admissible till the eldest son (of the widow of Police employee who dies during service/become invalid/handi-capped) attains the age of 25 years or gets an employment, whichever is earlier.
vii) ----
(vii) The Maintenance Allowance would start from the date of sanctioning by the competent authority.

